# STAT 540: Paper Review Assignment
### Matthew Shannon
#### February 20th, 2019
---
For this assignment, the paper: [Gene Expression by Mouse Inner Ear Hair Cells during Development](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405555/pdf/zns6366.pdf) published in the *Journal of Neuroscience* by Scheffer et al. in 2015 will be reviewed.

## The Goal of this Study:
This study sought to understand the gene expression of mouse Hair Cells (HCs) during development. HCs are terminally differentiated mechanoreceptor cells necessary for hearing and balance. HCs are difficult to study and defining how development influences their gene expression can greatly enhance our understanding of HC development, hereditary deafness (HD), and possible avenues for HD genetic therapies. Here, Scheffer et al. isolated HCs from cochlear and utricle (vestibluar) tissues of male and female mice at four developmental stages occurring before and during the acquisition of mechanosensitivity: E16, P0, P4, and P7. HCs were compared against supporting cells (SCs) of the sensory epithelium and nearby inner ear epithelial cells collected at the same developmental stages. HCs and SCs were subjected to next-generation high-throughput sequencing (HTS) analysis to quantify transcriptomic differences present in the cells of each condition. Differential gene expression analysis, principle component analysis, and a gene ontology analysis was conducted on the RNA-seq data to compare gene expression in HC and SC cells across developmental stages as well as the biological processes associated with HC development. Scheffer et al. observed that; at E16, HCs express genes related to morphogenesis, differentiation, and development; at P0 and P4, HCs express specific genes related to sensory and inner ear differentiation, and; at P7 HCs express genes related to cell signalling and synapsis, all relative to the gene expression profiles of SCs. From this study, it was concluded that genes preferentially expressed in HCs are good candidates for unknown deafness genes.

## Datasets used in this Study:
The raw data from this study is available in the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database repository under the accession number: [GSE60019](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE60019). In addition, to make their data publicly available, Scheffer et al. created the Shared Inner Ear Laboratory Database ([SHIELD](https://shield.hms.harvard.edu)) database which presents their gene expression data integrated with comprehensive annotation.

In this study, mRNA was collected from HC and SC cells of the cochlear and utricle (vestibluar) tissue of male and female mice at four developmental time points: E16, P0, P4, and P7. mRNA was then amplified using the Ovation 3'-DGE System and converted into a nondirectional Illumina sequencing library for single-end sequencing of 3' tagged 35/50bp reads via Illumina HiSeq methods to create the dataset. A comprehensive, cell-type specific RNA-seq analysis was done on the 16 samples using a matrix designed of three factors: [1] *cell type*, [2] *tissue source*, and [3] *developmental stage*. In this study biological duplicates were not used, rather, samples of different levels in other factors were combined and treated as replicates for statistical analysis.

## Analyses used in this Study:
1. Cell populations were collected from dissociations of cochlear and utricle tissue samples taken from mice expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) driven by the HC specific *Pou4f3* promoter. Cells were sorted using a BD FACS Aria II cell sorter and selected by GFP expression level (High expression; GFP<sup>+</sup> = HC, low expression; GFP<sup>-</sup> = SC). Purity of these populations was later assessed by gene expression analysis and both populations were deemed at least 99% pure.

2.  A single set of four RNAseq experiments was done at each developmental age. Sequence quality was assessed by the open-source FastQC program and nondirectional single-end sequencing of 3'-tagged mRNA was used. This methodology provides reads that are less biased and a more faithful representation of gene expression levels.

3. Principle Component Analysis was used to understand the primary drivers of gene expression differences and is shown as a biplot in Figure 2A. To do this, [dChip V2010.01](https://sites.google.com/site/dchipsoft/) software was used to visualize the expression data by hierarchical clustering of the genes. A distance metric between two genes was calculated as the correlation of the expression of the 3'-tags of two genes across samples. The centroid linkage method was then used to compute the distances between genes and gene clusters as well as between two gene clusters. To do this, Scheffer et al. log transformed the normalized expression values of the DEseq analysis and computed the standardized expression values of a gene across samples such that they had a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. These standardized values of genes were then averaged sample-wise in a gene cluster. From this, the average expression profile as the expression vector of a gene cluster was averaged to compute the distance between gene clusters.

4. Gene expression analysis: Reads were mapped against NCBI build 37/mm9 mouse genome assembly at DNAnexus and weighed by the posterior probability of their mapping. 20,207 RefSeq (reference) mouse genes were calculated with the 3SEQ transcriptome-based quantification analysis pipeline and the DEseq package in R/Bioconductor was used to test for differential gene expression in each of the 16 samples under various comparison methods. Benjamini and Hochberg statistical methods were used to correct for multiple testing and a False Discovery Rate was calculated for each gene. Results of the differential gene analysis of each sample is shown in Figure 2B-D. 5430 genes were found to be preferentially expressed in HCs, 3230 genes in SCs, and 9539 genes in both (non-specific). Next, postnatal cochlear and utricle HCs were compared to identify genes encoding proteins important for mature HCs. 916 genes were selected by FDR (< 0.05) and 222 genes were identified as cochlear enriched, 41 genes were utricle enriched, and 653 genes were expressed in both. HC gene network analysis: Genes with similar patterns of expression were grouped and relative mRNA expression profiles were created. dChip was then used to arrange the genes according to their expression pattern. The hierarchical clustering heat maps (Figure 6) shows subsets of genes enriched in SCs, HCs, cochlear-specific HCs, or in utricular-specific HCs.

5. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery ([DAVID](https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp)) which uses the Gene Ontology classifications of associated genes with biological processes was then used to investigate the biological processes involved in HC development.

6. RNA-seq findings were reproduced in a second mouse strain expressing the fluorescent tdTomatoe protein under the control of the *Gfi1* promoter, and RNAseq data was validated using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), immunohistochemistry (IHC), and immunocytochemistry (ICC) analyses, all supporting the HTS findings.


## Paper Review:
This study explored the gene expression of mouse Hair Cells (HCs) throughout development in relation to the identification of novel genes associated with hereditary deafness. This study demonstrates specific transcriptomic changes in mice HCs from E16 to P7. Specifically, it is identified that mouse HC precursors will initially upregulate genes specific to differentiation and development as they transition into a HC phenotype before switching their gene expression profile to upregulate genes specific to cell signalling and synapsis upon maturity. The methods used to come to these conclusions were well defined, novel, reproducible, and validated through RT-qPCR and *in situ* analyses. However, the significance of these findings are limited by the experimental design. The differential gene expression analysis was done relative to the expression levels found in SCs and not by absolute expression. This means that the genes identified as differentially expressed in HCs may not provide an accurate reflection of the HC transcriptome throughout development. These observations may simply be differences relative to the SCs and not other cell types (i.e. neurons), providing a limitation on the application of these findings to HC development and hearing loss research. As well, Scheffer et al. did not stratify their analyses by biological sex. The biological sex variable may contribute unique differences in the gene expression profiles of male versus female HCs that will not be identified by these methods. Finally, a great next step for this study would be to apply a single cell RNA sequencing approach and 10X genomics analysis. This methodology would allow for the identification of absolute gene expression differences in multiple cell types throughout the process of mouse sensory epithelia development. This analysis would improve upon the issue of relativity in the used methods and allow for additional understanding of the differentiation trajectories of HCs and SCs, as well as the change in cell composition of cochlear and utricle tissues throughout development.
